#Database Systems Overview

####**1. What database models do you know?**
    
__Database model__ is a type of data model that determines the logical structure of a database and fundamentally determines in 
which manner data can be stored, organized, and manipulated. 
The most popular example of a database model is the relational model, which uses a table-based format.
    
__Database models:__
* __Hierarchical__ (tree): in a hierarchical model, data is organized into a tree-like structure, implying a single parent for each record. 
    A sort field keeps sibling records in a particular order. Hierarchical structures were widely used in the early mainframe database management 
    systems and now describe the structure of XML documents. This structure allows one one-to-many
    relationship between two types of data. Record access is done by navigating downward through the data structure using pointers combined with sequential accessing. 
    Because of this, the hierarchical structure is inefficient for certain database operations when a full path is not also included for each record.
* __Network / graph__: the network model expands upon the hierarchical structure, allowing __many-to-many__ relationships in a tree-like structure that allows 
multiple parents. It was most popular before being replaced by the relational model.
The network model organizes data using two fundamental concepts, called records and sets. Records contain fields (which may be organized hierarchically). 
Sets define __one-to-many__ relationships between records: one owner, many members. A record may be an owner in any number of sets, and a member in any number of sets.
* __Relational__ (table): the basic data structure of the relational model is the table, where information about a particular entity  is represented in rows 
(also called records) and columns. Thus, the "relation" in "relational database" refers to the various tables in the database; a relation is a set of records. The columns enumerate
the various attributes of the entity and a row is an actual instance of the entity that is represented by the relation.
As a result, each record of the table represents various attributes of a single item.
* __Object-oriented__: the OO model is based to the Object-oriented principle in general.

	---

####**2. Which are the main functions performed by a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)?**

__Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMS)__ manage data stored in tables. It organizes data into related rows and columns.

__RDBMS__ systems typically implement:
- Creating / altering / deleting tables and relationships between them (database schema)
- Adding, changing, deleting, searching and retrieving of data stored in the tables
- Support for the SQL language
- Transaction management (optional)

Popular __RDBMS servers__:
- Microsoft SQL Server
- Oracle Database
- MySQL
- IBM DB2
- PostgreSQL
- SQLite

__Relational databases__: represent a bunch of tables together with the relationships between them.

---

####**3. Define what is "table" in database terms**

__"Table"__ is a collection of related data held in a structured format within a database.
__Database tables__ consist of data, arranged in rows and columns. All rows in the __"tables"__ have the same structure. 
Columns have name and type (number, string, date, image, or other). Each table has __Table Schema__. 
The schema of a table is an ordered sequence of column specifications (name and type).

__Primary key__:
- is a column of the table that uniquely identifies its rows (usually its is a number).
- Two records (rows) are different if and only if their primary keys are different.
- The primary key can be composed by several columns (composite primary key).

	---

####**4. Explain the difference between a primary and a foreign key.**

__Primary Key__:
The primary key of a relational table uniquely identifies each record in the table.
It can either be a normal attribute that is guaranteed to be unique or it can be generated by the DBMS. 
Primary keys may consist of a single attribute or multiple attributes in combination. 
Two records (rows) are different if and only if their primary keys are different. 
The primary key can be composed by several columns (composite primary key).

__Foreign Key__:
In context of relational databases, a foreign key is a field (or collection of fields) in one table that uniquely
identifies a row of another table. In simpler words, the foreign key is defined in a second table, but it refers to
the primary key in the first table. The table containing the foreign key is called the child table, and the table containing
the candidate key is called the referenced or parent table.

---

####**5. Explain the different kinds of relationships between tables in relational databases.**

There are __three types__ of relationships in RDBMSs:
- __One-to-Many__ Relationship: is the most common type of relationship. In this type of relationship, a row in table A can have many matching rows in table B, 
but a row in table B can have only one matching row in table A. For example, the publishers and titles tables have a one-to-many relationship: each publisher produces many titles, 
but each title comes from only one publisher.
- __Many-to-Many__ Relationships: in this case we have a row in table A can have many matching rows in table B, and vice versa.
You create such a relationship by defining a third table, called a junction table, whose primary key consists of the foreign 
keys from both table A and table B. For example, the authors table and the titles table have a many-to-many relationship that 
is defined by a one-to-many relationship from each of these tables to the titleauthors table. The primary key of the 
titleauthors table is the combination of the au_id column (the authors table's primary key) and the title_id column 
(the titles table's primary key).
- __One-to-One__ Relationships: in this case a row in table A can have no more than one matching row in table B, 
and vice versa. A one-to-one relationship is created if both of the related columns are primary keys or have unique 
constraints. This type of relationship is not common because most information related in this way would be all in one table.

---

####**6. When is a certain database schema normalized? and What are the advantages of normalized databases?**

Database normalization is the process of organizing the columns (attributes) and tables (relations) 
of a relational database to minimize data redundancy.

Normalization involves decomposing a table into less redundant (and smaller) tables without losing information;
defining foreign keys in the old table referencing the primary keys of the new ones. The objective is to isolate data 
so that additions, deletions, and modifications of an attribute can be made in just one table and then propagated through
the rest of the database using the defined foreign keys.

---

####**7. What are database integrity constraints and when are they used?**

__Integrity constraints__ ensure data integrity in the database tables.Enforce data rules which cannot be violated.

- __Primary key constraint__: ensures that the primary key of a table has unique value for each table row.
- __Unique key constraint__: ensures that all values in a certain column (or a group of columns) are unique.
- __Foreign key constraint__: ensures that the value in given column is a key from another table.
- __Check constraint__: ensures that values in a certain column meet some predefined condition.

---

####**8. Point out the pros and cons of using indexes in a database.**

The __indexing__ increases the disk space usage and reduces the performance of adding, deleting, and updating, but in most cases the benefit of indices for data retrieval greatly exceeds the disadvantages.

__Pros__:
Quick access to a database table specific information. The index is a structure of the database table the value of one or more columns to sort.
Fast search in large data (don't use index when you have small data)

__Cons__:
More indexes will affect the speed of update and insert, because it requires the same update each index file.
When data is frequently updated and new data is inserted don't use indexes. Use indexes only when you search in the data frequently and you need quick access to it.

---

####**9. What's the main purpose of the SQL language?**

__Structured Language Query__ or simply __SQL__ is a special-purpose programming language designed for managing data held in 
a relational database management system (RDBMS), or for stream processing in a relational data stream management system (RDSMS).

Briefly said the purpose of SQL Structured Query Language is to provide a Structured way by which one can Query information 
in database using a standard Language.

__SQL language supports:__
- Creating, altering, deleting tables and other objects in the database
- Searching, retrieving, inserting, modifying and deleting table data (rows)

---

####**10. What are transactions used for?**

__Transactions__ are a sequence of database operations which are executed as a single unit:
- Either all of them execute successfully
- Or none of them is executed at all

Example:
A bank transfer from one account into another (withdrawal + deposit)
If either the withdrawal or the deposit fails the entire operation should be cancelled

__Transactions Behavior__
- Transactions guarantee the consistency and the integrity of the database:
    - All changes in a transaction are temporary
    - Changes become final when COMMIT is successfully executed
    - At any time all changes done in the transaction can be cancelled by executing ROLLBACK
    - All operations are executed as a single unit
    - Either all of them pass or none of them
    
---

####**11. What is a NoSQL database?**

__NoSQL__ database provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of data that is modeled in means other than the tabular 
relations used in relational databases.

__NoSQL__ Database key __"features"__:
- Use document-based model (non-relational)
- Schema-free document storage
- support CRUD operations
- support indexing and querying
- supports concurrency and transactions
- Highly optimized for append / retrieve
- Great performance and scalability

---

####**12. Explain the classical non-relational data models.**

- __Key-Value stores__: these DMS store items as alpha-numeric identifiers (keys) and associated values in simple,
standalone tables. The values may be simple text strings or more complex lists and sets. 
Data searches can usually only be performed against keys, not values, and are limited to exact matches.
- __Document databases__: were, as their name implies, designed to manage and store documents. 
These documents are encoded in a standard data exchange format such as XML, JSON or BSON (Binary JSON).
Unlike the simple key-value stores described above, the value column in document databases contains 
semi-structured data – specifically attribute name/value pairs. A single column can house hundreds of such attributes,
and the number and type of attributes recorded can vary from row to row. Also, unlike simple key-value stores, both keys 
and values are fully searchable in document databases.
- __Wide-Column__ Stores: like document databases, Wide-Column (or Column-Family)
stores (hereafter WC/CF) employ a distributed, column-oriented data structure that accommodates multiple attributes per key.
- __Graph databases__:  replace relational tables with structured relational graphs of interconnected 
key-value pairings. They are similar to object-oriented databases as the graphs are represented as an object-oriented 
network of nodes (conceptual objects), node relationships and properties (object attributes expressed as 
key-value pairs). They are the only of the four NoSQL types discussed here that concern themselves with relations, 
and their focus on visual representation of information makes them more human-friendly than other NoSQL DMS.

---

####**13. Give few examples of NoSQL databases and their pros and cons.**

- __Casssandra__: The Apache Cassandra project emerged out of Facebook in 2008 and is now a fully grown tool used for many large data stores and integrated with other popular tools like Solr. The mechanism offers a hybrid mixture of a column-oriented database with a key/value store. Not every row must have each column, but the columns are grouped into families that make them feel like tables. The system offers a tunable amount of replication and consistency. In one recent test, Netflix built a cluster of 288 nodes and found writes scaled linearly.
- __CouchDB__: data arrives in JavaScript's JSON format, its queries are written in JavaScript, and the data goes back in JSON. It's a database built for the Web and the people who program it. (Sidenote: Some use CouchDB offline in the background of mobile apps.) CouchDB stores key/value pairs and propagates them over the nodes, offering eventual consistency. There's also a more commercial cousin, Couchbase, that offers caching, better sharding, incremental queries, better indices, and a few more features.
- __Oracle NoSQL__: The wizards at Oracle took one look at the NoSQL movement and decided they needed to have a product that would split up key/value pairs across a collection of nodes. The resulting Oracle NoSQL offers a flexible amount of transaction protection that can range from acknowledging the data is stored on one node to waiting until it is successfully backed up across the network.
- __MongoDB__: has all of the classic features that define NoSQL: key/value storage, JavaScript formatting, and flexible replication for sharding across nodes. (Sharding is illustrated.) The data is written with a philosophy MongoDB calls multiversion concurrency control, a structure that keeps older versions of the data around to help keep consistency in complicated transactions. The user base is large, and there is a wide selection of ancillary tools, no doubt thanks to the open source option (strict AGPL).
- __Hadoop (HBase)__: While most people think of Hadoop and all of its tools as a mechanism for harnessing the power of many machines, Hadoop also includes a database, HBase, that spreads data out among the nodes. The map/reduce structure of Hadoop is well-suited for complicated computational jobs or queries that are farmed out to each node. The field is growing, and new databases for each node like Accumulo are enhancing the Hadoop platform.
- __DynamoDB__: Amazon Web Services offers more ways to store data than there are fingers on one hand. DynamoDB is the NoSQL solution that takes key/value pairs and spreads them out across servers in three different zones where all the data is stored on SSDs. If you anticipate more demand for the traffic, DynamoDB will add more servers behind the scenes.

__Pros:__
- It's Open Source - Open source products provide developers with some great benefits, notably their no-cost status. Other benefits: open-source software tends to be more reliable, secure, and faster to deploy than proprietary alternatives.
- Elastic Scaling - NoSQL replaces the old 'scale up' mantra of database managers with a new one: 'scale out.' Instead of adding bigger servers to handle more data load, a NoSQL database allows a company to distribute the load across multiple hosts as the load increases.
- Different NoSQL DBs for Different Projects - MongoDB and Redis are good choices for storing frequently-written, rarely read statistical data, such as a web hit counter. Hadoop, a freeform, distributed DB does a good job of storing Big Data such as weather stats or business analytics work. Memcache, a transient DB, excels at storing web sessions, locks, and short-term stats). Cassandra and Riak (automatically clustered, redundant stores) perform well in environments with high availability apps, when maximum uptime is vital.
- NoSQL’s Impressive Implementations - Companies such as Amazon, the BBC, Facebook and Google rely on NoSQL DBs.
- NoSQL Flies High in the Cloud - NoSQL and the cloud are a natural fit. Today’s servers are inexpensive and can easily be scaled up on demand using a service such as Amazon EC2. Like all cloud technology, EC2 is based on virtualization. The weak link of virtualization is I/O performance, with memory and CPU being the strong links. NoSQL databases mostly use memory over disk as the primary write location – thereby preventing inconsistent I/O performance. And since NoSQL datastores typically leverage horizontal scalability via partitioning, they are able to take advantage of the cloud’s elastic provisioning.

__Cons:__
- Open Source can Mean Spotty Support for Enterprises
- Not Mature Enough for Enterprises
- Business Intelligence Limitations
- Lack of Expertise
- Compatibility Issues